Okay, so we spent three lectures talking
about GPU GPU architecture. It should be
lecture eight. Forgot to update the le
number again. Um, so this is GPU
architecture 4. I I remember to update
the GPU architecture 4, but I forgot to
update the lecture five. So, uh, this is
the fourth lecture for GP architecture
and this is the last one. So, let's give
a quick review for what happened in the
previous slides
in the previous lectures. So we talk
about GPU architecture then there are a
few key aspect that you need to
remember. So first thing is uh the CU
contains CP AC and GPU contains CP AC
and CU right CU or CUS are the cores of
the GPU is where the instructions are
executed and there is a process of
dispatching the kernels
into the computer unit and it's actually
the unit that is dispatching is the
blocks. So we dispatch the blocks into
the computer unit. Then one block can
only exist in one one block. All the
threads in one block must be executed in
one CU. But one CU can execute many
blocks at the same time. Then it can be
as small as one and can be as large as
40 if we use the number of AMD um
parameters.
Okay. So there are a few limiting factor
that decides what can uh how many blocks
can be dispatched or how many words that
can be dispatched into one CU. So by the
way if we want to dispatch the words a
block to a CU all the words have to go
there. It cannot say I can hold two
words but I cannot hold two other words.
In that case the whole block cannot go.
Okay. So in this case uh there are four
parameters or four conditions that
decide if a block can go or not. Then
it's wayfront slot
scalar registers vector registers they
are allocated similarly to the mylo
process. It depends on if you have the
resources or not. The shared memory is
also a memory allocation process. Okay.
Then the wavefront slot is a fixed
number uh is the fixed
uh number of works or wave fronts that
the CU can handle.
Then we talk about the internal
architecture of a computer unit. So here
the most important part is the issuing
process. Then there are 40 wayfront or
40 works sitting there to be scheduled.
40 instructions that you can schedule
right. So which one can go? Then they
must follow a rule. Then in each cycle
we can issue five we can issue up to
five work level instructions in every
cycle. Now what's the rule? They must
come from one way from two. This is
something that we didn't say when we
first introduce the issue state because
we haven't talked about the same thing
there. Right? But since this time since
we talk about the execution of the CMD
we know like the first cycle we issue
from wayfront one and issue to 7D1.
Second cycle way from two issue to 72.
Okay means in each cycle we must select
up to five warp level instructions from
one way pool.
They must not running one instruction
instruction. So if one work is already
running one instruction then we cannot
issue it. This is a prevention that we
want to prevent header. We don't want
GPU to have super complex circuit to
deal with hater ordering. We only want
to allocate all the resources into cmds
in the alus so that the computing power
is super high. Right now we must not go
into one pipeline unit. For example, if
there are two words that both wants to
go to LDS for example or VLU, they
cannot go together because they have
conflict. One unit can only exclude one
instruction at a time. So this is the
issue rule of the GPU.
Then uh the TPU
mainly rely on thread level parallelism
like remember last time last time we
talked about parallelism. We have data
level parism, thread level parism or
instruction level parism. So GPU rely on
both data level parism and thread level
parallelism. Right? So there are many
many threads waiting there so that if
one thread got stuck when it's accessing
memory the other thread can go with
doing real calculation.
Then uh we also talk about internal
structure of the SMD unit. Then for we
focus on single precision unit. Then for
most common setup there are 16 lengths
of single precision unit. That means
there are 16 groups of ALUS that can
process 16 calculation or 16 instruction
level 16 thread level instruction in one
in every cycle at the same time. Okay,
this is a typical parameter for CMD CMDL
use. Then like recently floating point
like lower precision floating point is
popular. So modern GPUs typically has
have 32 lengths for half precision. Then
probably even more for 8 bit
floatingoint numbers. Then if you are
talking about double precision it really
depends on the market and that this GPU
is targeting at. If it's graphics
oriented probably they have they have
zero lengths for double precision. They
just refuse to execute. If you really
want to execute,
they either takes a very very long time
to use single precision to approximate
or they just directly refuse to execute
and return an error. So either way can
happen. Uh so even for higher end GPUs
um it's typically 2:1 ratio that's eight
uh eight lanes for double precision. Now
but like today since machine learning is
getting more popular they kind of prefer
to add more resources for lower
precision rather than high precision um
unit. So more common parameter is two
lines for double precision. Then you can
do a calculation for a double precision
operation. Then what's the throughput?
Then the throughput is two thread level
instructions per
cycle for that case. Right. So that's
actually very slow and uh it's much much
slower than
um single precision calculation.
Okay. Then also last time we used the R9
nano GPU as an example to do this
calculation. So there are three
different questions. They're related but
slightly different. How many threads
that the GPU can run concurrently? Then
how many instructions a GPU can complete
per cycle and how many operations a GPU
can complete per cycle
per second.
Then we get we calculate these three
these uh three numbers. So I want you to
be able to calculate a similar number.
If I give you a different parameter set
then
uh you
you should also know how this parameter
and these parameters are different. this
calculation. These two are more closely
related but the first one is totally
different.
The first one how many th can run
concurrently is how many th are waiting
there just staying there to be scheduled
and the second one is the computational
throughput is how many results in theory
that a GPU can really um return. So if
you want to know how powerful a GPU is
and if you only want to use one
parameter to decide if this is the GPU
right for you then use the number of
teraflops.
Yes
point operation per second. Okay so this
one is 8.19 then there are some higher
end 16 uh or 20 or 30 teraflops today.
Okay. So we're basically done with the
compute part. So we know how the
instructions are being computed. Then
today we're mainly going to focus on the
memory interface and how the GPU memory
works. Okay, let's start with memory
interface.
Then last time we say a CU has three
memory interfaces. You need to
communicate with three piece of memory.
The instruction memory and the vector
memory and the scalar memory. So as we
talked before
there are 16 in 16 lanes because we're
mainly talking about vector memory unit
right so
not 16 there are 64 threads there there
are 64 thread that means if we execute
one load or store instruction
load means bring data from memory to
register store means writing the
register to the memory so if execute one
load or one store instruction is not
only storing or loading one piece of
data it's loading or storing 64 piece of
data right
so that means to execute one instruction
we actually generate 64
piece of addresses
and think about the memory bandwidth
that is required at here and that's a
huge one but a very common pattern is
these addresses that the adjacent thread
are executing are not independent from
each other. They're likely to be
related. If they are processing close by
data, there's a certain pattern of
locality.
Okay. Then later on we'll talk about
this word locality in more detail when
we talk about caches. But here we're
talking about adjacent threat accessing
close by data. So we don't want to issue
64 memory transactions to a vector
memory. Now what do we do?
We have one terminology called memory
coaling. Okay, this is a rarely used
word that sometimes speller spell spell
checker may think this is a wrong
spelling word but coalesing means we
want to combine
memory transactions into fewer memory
transactions so that they can be
combined and eventually we issue fewer
um
memory transactions.
So how we can do that? We need to look
at the interface here.
So what do we do? What's the interface
between the memory vector memory and the
computer unit? It's not a single wire
but it's a wire of a certain width. So
once we want to issue an address, we say
we want to read this piece of data and
we send the address to the vector
memory, right? Then the vector memory
will not only return a bite to us and
typically we even don't need to specify
how many bytes we want to read. So when
we send the rest send a read request to
the vector memory it will immediately
return either 32 by of data 64 by data
or 128 by data. Okay.
So that's because there are so many
that's the number of wires that is put
between the vector memory and the
computer unit. Think about this number.
It's actually a quite large number of
wires, right? So it's one more than
1,000 wires just next to each other to
hide the data from the vector memory to
the computer unit. We don't want to
select we just want to get say oh they
send me all the data I may need to use
it later.
So in fact when we send an address to
the destination we typically don't even
send the whole address.
Okay. So we can have an estimation how
many
bit that we send to the vector memory.
What's then how wide the address is?
Yeah. How wide is address? Eight by
right. So typically when we're saying
address is 8 byt so 64 bit right.
So address is 64
bit.
However, there's some part of this
address is not useful. Think about 64
bit. How large the memory can be and do
we really have that large memory?
Typically no, right? We don't really
have that large memory. So
this 64 bit can represent 2 to the^ 64
this large memory and 2 to the^ of 30 is
DB
40 is TB
50 is
pabyte
2 to 60 is datab right
I'm not even sure about this term here
so because this so rarely used 6460. So
we don't really have that large of
memory. So what is a reasonable size of
memory? So probably at most 40 to 50
level, right? So TPUs vendors typically
actually do not use that wide memory.
They use two they use 48 bit or
sometimes even 40 bit memory address
between the CU and the vector memory. So
that we have a large address but the
higher bits are just discarded. We don't
consider those part those part are
always zero. So we don't need to
transfer them. Every bit that transfers
on the wire will consume energy and we
want to save those energy.
Okay. So two to power of 28 then still
two to the power of 48. Let's assume 48
bit actual addresses.
Now if we want to get 64
byt
data always as a unit we need to send 48
bit address.
Okay. So one zero or one this is
specifies one by
two two digit that's two bytes right
three that's four by
right so if we want always want to get
byt data we don't really need the
address that is specifying which bite
within this 64 that we need to access
right so let's say this is 8
and 64
so and so on right so we can remove all
these six zeros there
because we don't care
which bite within this 64 byt we're
actually accessing right we only need to
specify which group of 64 byt we're
accessing. So then we can reduce to two
to the power of 42
only 42 bit of data that is good enough
to send from the CU to the memory
interface.
You okay with this calculation?
But we don't need to
care about which exact bite that we're
accessing with within this war bite.
So we can just remove them.
Okay.
So
42 bit of memory interface
um for the addressing and once we send
the address in there then it will return
the data probably a few bytes later
hopefully a few a few cycles later.
Okay. Then if we want to access 64 byt
then what typically this thread each
thread may access four by of data 8 by
of data or at most 16 16 byt of data no
more than that right in this case we
waste the resources.
So what we do here is basically we just
consider this is a group of 64 byt
right? We call this we typically call
this cache line. It can be slightly
different but let's just make it simple.
This is one cache line right? What is a
cach line? It's the unit of data that is
always transferred between the vector
memory and the core.
Okay. Every time we send a piece of we
send a request we get one cache line
back and that's 64 byt. I just use
number 64. So this is 64 byt. the 64 byt
and 64 by right. So we only need to
consider
which catch lines is being touched by
these 64 threads there. Right? So
sometimes it can catch can touch 64
different
um it can touch 64 different catch
lines. They're totally accessing very
random addresses. That means they're
just accessing the whole memory,
accessing anywhere. Then there's there's
totally no not collizable,
right? But sometimes in the best case
they can just be accessing one piece of
data, one cach line that can happen.
Then in that case, we can only send one
transaction,
one request to the memory system. In
this particular diagram, we're reducing
64 transactions down to three
transactions.
Okay, that can save a lot of energy and
a lot of time to get the data from the
vector memory. Okay, we reduce the
number of transactions because they're
only touching a certain number of hash
lines.
And this whole process is called memory
coaling is to combine the memory access
that the cash lines that is touch.
is the coraling process that they used
in GPUs.
Okay. So what's the implication? Why we
need to care about this?
Let's consider a matrix
access data. Then when you write a CPU
code, then you want to traverse a
matrix. It doesn't really matter a lot
if you traverse in this way or this way
because you just access like 1024 for
example that amount of data that piece
of data that number of floating point
numbers right but for GPU that matters a
lot if you consider each row it's 1024
okay 1024 elements that's 4 kilobyte
4 kilobyte per row if you're accessing
it this way right one Thread two, thread
four, three, thread four, right? They
are colexible and they are perfectly
colexible because the data you are
accessing is adjacent to each other.
That means we need to send very few
transactions
to the memory system.
If we accessing data in this way
horizontally,
then consider this way. We thread one
access this piece of data. Thread two
access this piece of it. Thread three,
thread four.
Address zero, address 4K, address 8K,
address 12K.
Definitely they're touching different
cach lines and they're not only
accessing different cachines, they're
accessing different pages.
That means they're not collapsible.
That collapsible means we're sending 64
transactions. And for every transaction
although we only need four by of data
we're actually getting 64 byt of data.
Okay. So in GPU it's strongly preferred
we access data in this way rather than
this way.
Okay. So optimiz optimization how we can
do this then
we need to carefully consider the data
layout
right. So if you have a memory if you
have a matrix multiplication just let's
consider matrix multiplication you have
one matrix that is natural just access
data this way but the other matrix you
have to access this data this way
horizontally right this one multiply by
this one this one multiply by this one
can accumulate together so what you can
do is pre transform this matrix
then it can get higher performance
Okay, another wave very common way is
called tiling. What is tiling is
basically load a small piece of data
maybe 4x4 or 16 by 16 a small pile of
data load another small pile of data
load in a coal way load data and store
it in the memory part that's called lo
local data share we call about LDS right
we load the data from the memory to
local data share in a collable way but
local data share is super fast so we can
do all the calculation with that tow
then stored then then discard the data
from LDS and load another batch. In this
way, we lower data in a collable way for
both matrices. Then we can still get um
reasonable performance. Okay, we avoid
nonolable load. NOS collable load is
a a huge performance damage that you
will have really low performance if you
do not call load. videos are designed
for coal load. So be careful about the
data that you load and also that decides
for vector for matrix access it's very
likely that you can get really fast
access right but for some irregular
program like graph processing that's
hard to proc hard to determine that
which part that the graph you're
accessing you may just jump to a very
far location then for a graph processing
this type of irregular workload GPUs are
just struggle
Okay, another case if we consider job
partition
remember last time we say it's better to
not to launch so many threads is just
limit the number of threads for the
number of cus or number of threads that
we're combo unit can handle right or we
can launch maybe two or three more times
more but just definitely it's not launch
in a way that each thread is processing
one piece of data
Then naturally we have two different
ways to process this data. The first way
is how we typically would write a CPU
problem that v one will take care of
this part
two will take part of this part three
four and so on. Right? Each takes a
chunk of it. It's very natural very
comfortable to program. Another way is
to do this thread one here then thread
two here thread three thread four thread
five then thread one here thread two
here and so on right in this way. So
which way is better for GQ
and why? Yeah.
>> Yeah.
Why?
So think about your thread. Let's just
make it simple. Two threads execute a
lock step. Okay. And just imagine these
two parts are very far away. You two
piece of data are okay. These two thread
this processing and this process will
happen in the same cycle. Okay. Can you
call us these two? Then just imagine
they're very far away from each other.
Basically, no. You cannot call us these
two. And if you do that 64 thread,
they're executing data that is
processing data that very far away. They
have no way to call us, right? Then come
come back this way. this thread, this
thread and they are executing a lock
step way, right? They're accessing data
at the same time. They're next to each
other. Then they are collapsible.
Then once they're done with this
processing these two piece of data, they
move together to here. And this is still
collable, still collable, still
collable.
Uh
no there's nothing to do with local data
share. It's just just consider this is
each each
just consider this part and this part
data are very far away. Just consider if
we're processing a one gigabyte of piece
of data, right? If we have if we're
processing one gigabyte of data then we
have 1,000 threads then these part these
two points are one megabytes away now
and there's no way to coales in these
two case in these cases
and they're one megabytes away and here
what we do is these two are next to each
other four by way right then we all jump
together we jump just directly jump to
one megabytes further But these two
threads are still accessing data next to
each other. Four by way when it's four
by way is coal.
Okay.
So partition now we need to this is
nolizable and this is coastable. So we
need to carefully consider the task
allocation so that we can make
collapsible memory access. Right? So if
you use GPU you care about performance.
If you care about performance, then if
you write simple program, it's probably
not as good as CPUs and consider how you
can make the X memory access colexible
and to achieve the highest performance
otherwise you will get a really
terrible.
This is not a GPU programming course.
So, but this is definitely something
like a GPU programmer needs to consider.
Okay. And let's go with the memory
hierarchy. So we're talking about CU.
Then at this moment we need to forget
what's inside CU and let's look at
outside what happens outside CU the
memory part. Then
so typically we also say front GPU GPU's
front end GPU back end. The front end is
anything before CPU and the back end is
the memory hierarchy.
Okay, let's forget about what's inside
CU. Then consider a CU as just a simple
block. Now CU has a dedicated L1 Vcash.
So it's very common to write a dollar
sign to represent cash because they
pronounce in a similar way. Okay, if you
write cash, everyone can understand it.
um L1 V cache remember we say there's
three type of memory vector memory
scalar memory and instruction memory
they're defined by different type of
data right if you use S load this goes
to scalar memory if you use a V lo or
global load it goes to L1 V cache and we
need a L level one cache and we need a L
level one scalar cache or L1 I cache
instruction cache three interface
three part three caches, three cache
unit
and actually they are not that simple.
Each compute unit has a dedicated L1
vcache.
Okay, then each L each CU has a
dedicated L1 V cache and four sometimes
five shares one L1 S and L1 I cache.
Okay. Dedicated L1 Vcache and shared L1S
and L1 I cache.
So can you think about the rationale
behind this design?
Yeah.
Yeah, you need to
the direction is correct. You need to
consider what data for what we need
these three different part of memory.
Right. So in a very high level
description why we need different
caches. Then the standard answer is only
answer in one sentence is this type the
three type of data have different type
of locality
okay but let's explain more
for I cache
do you expect all the computer unit to
execute the same program for most of
time yes right so then once you load one
part of instruction instruction.
The second CU then load this type of
instruction. It's very very likely a
cache and actually the L1 cache is not
small. It's a rather big cache there. So
you want L1 cache you want instruction
L1 I here instruction to have a very
very high hash heat rate. Cash G rate
means you what percent of time that you
can find the data in this L1 cache right
although cach rate locality is something
that we will expand when we talk about
caches but L1 I cache you want have
really really high cache gate rate and
really low latency so that the
instruction is there then you can always
issue instructions if instructions are
not there loaded
then you have no way to issue them then
your ALU is your powerful SIM unit is
thick
and consider L1S.
What's what's in being stored in L1S?
Now we say L1S typically stores
um kernel sizes,
block sizes,
um kernel arguments, pointers like
buffer root, buffer location, right?
buffer pointers and do expect they to
have the same data rely on the same
piece of data or different pieces of
data.
Just consider kernel arguments, right?
They in buffer out buffer all of them,
all the threads share the same inbuffer
and out buffer. They just need to add
their own offsets, their different
offset. So when you load a buffer or
kernel arguments or kernel sizes, they
share the same piece of data.
So they help each other for loading this
part of data. Then if one loaded this
part of data, the second one we use it.
So they're not competing for these
resources. Then consider a one I cache.
Consider a vector add example.
We load one piece of data.
Do you expect this piece of data to be
used by another C, another another work,
another block? Typically, no. Right? So,
you pro you load this data, you process
it, you are done, then you're just throw
it away. So, in this case, for vector
caches, or vector data, they're very
likely they're processing different type
of data, different data, right?
Different locations. So, if you have a
share data, they're competing each
other. They're fighting with each other.
they take out the data that it belongs
to another CU that is bad for
performance. In this case, we want them
to have dedicated captions just work for
them even though that means it's
smaller.
Okay.
Then since this group of four use share
some resources, whenever there's a group
shared some resources in the computer
architecture, we name it with a block.
In this particular block we call it
shader array but is a shader
because GPUs are designed for graphics.
Then in internally at AMD they just call
a CU sometimes I call CU a shader for
most of time if they're designing for
both graphics and computer it's just
called shader. Remember a shader
is something can be either software or
hardware that calculates the properties
of pixels or vertices right most likely
to be color but it can be other
properties. So those are the hardware
that is responsible for calculating the
properties of a pixel or or a vertex.
So in this case we call this a shader
array. In a GPU we have a lot of shader
arrays.
Just consider the R9 nano example.
How many CUS does an R9 nano have?
64. Right? Last time we use 64 because
we like this number is just easy to
calculate. So always a power of two. So
how many shader arrays we need to have
in
our model?
16, right? 16 shade arrays.
There's actually another level called
shader engine but we're not talking
about shader engine but the general
property a chain of property for AMD GPU
is how many shader engine per
GPU is two or four sometimes one how
many shader array per shader engine how
many CU per shader array how many cmd
per CU right you need to consider this
hierarchy there but anyway when you
multiply this number together then you
get the how powerful a GPU is. Each data
array they all have six L1 caches. Okay.
And all these L1 caches are connected
with L2 caches. Okay. A group of L2
caches. And we call this L2 caches
memory side L2.
And the L1 caches the core side L1.
Not only because L2 is closer to DM but
the memory DRM is the memory there right
L1 cache is closer to the core core side
cache and memory side cache are
terminologies
uh
are terminology to describe the function
of a cache
if you talk about say if you say core
side caches memory side caches to
someone who always been studying CPU
architecture they probably don't even
know this terminology Because in CPUs
typically all the caches are core side
caches but in GPUs we need to have
memory side caches. So what does he mean
by memory side caches talk about L2
here. So L2 caches they serve their own
DM. So there are many DM tiles. Remember
the PCB that we're showing right there
are many
DRAM chips around a GPU where there in
the in HPM there are six six piles of
HPM around the um around the chip. So
each L2 is responsible for their
associated DM. There's no network that's
connecting. So this L2 never access this
DM. So we don't need to consider that
only L2 serves one D. They serve as a
bandwidth booster. So if they directly
access DOM, they get faster. They get
higher bandwidth because H2 is using DOM
technology or
flip-flop flip-flops. Okay, they are
faster than DA but their density is
smaller. So they they have higher
bandwidth, lower latency. So they serve
as a bandwidth booster. So they this can
pro if you access data and there's a
reasonable cache rate then you can get
higher bandwidth and lower latency from
L2.
uh in amidia GPUs basically there's no
way that you can directly communicate
with dur every data access needs to go
from L2 to D in AMD GPUs
even DM engines are connected with L2
caches in AMD DM engines are directly
connected with DS
then yeah so then what decides a core
side one catch and memory
L2 cache or memory side cache or L1
cache we need to consider what address
range that each cache module is
responsible for. So for L1 caches they
have no choice they have to serve the
whole address range from zero to
infinity. to the core one say I want
this piece of data they have to provide
this data they have no choice right then
for L2 cache because they're responsible
for memory partitions you have to we
have to have some way to partition the
uh to partition the memory how we
partition them is by using this way hash
line level interle
this one is respond for 0 to 63. Let's
skip the port 127 and so on. Right? And
when we arrive at 383, then we go back
to 384 and so on. Right? Interview
then
size. Okay. The missing size.
Okay.
Then so this is called cash line level
or cach line granularity interle. What
is why we need this design?
An alternative design is one to2 0 to
one gigabytes here, one to2 gigabytes
here, two to three gigabytes here and so
on. Right? We can do that. That's
which way is better. Typically we
consider this way is better because
cus may access say a vector and another
vector to together to to get a result to
another vector. These vectors are not
one gigabytes in size not that large. If
you say oh I have one vector 0 to 1 GB
they allocate here only this part is
useful the rest is not useful at all
right so in that case we limit the
parallel we want all the part of the
port the chip to be busy in this case if
we access a catch line since we have so
many computer units there are 64 of them
more than 100 of them we're very likely
to access rather in a rather random way,
right? In a mass access of the data,
then very likely we can allow all of
them to pump data to the CU at the same
time to maximize the bandwidth.
Okay.
So,
we need to consider for every L1 cache,
let's say this L1 S cache, according to
the address it needs to access, it
actually need to connect to all the L2
caches.
Right? It needs to connect to all the L2
caches. Then every L1 cache needs to
connect to all the L2 caches and every
L2 cache needs to connect to the all the
L1 caches. So this is something that we
call a network on chip. Okay, this is a
comp complex network there. Then
typically what's the
what's the topology here and that the
most common topology we use is called a
crossbar
or if you write xbar is also a common
terminology that is acceptable. So a
crossbar that connects all the caches
together. What is a crossbar? Let me
draw a a crossbar here. It's
programmable.
Okay.
I said we have
one,
I2, I3, I4. Then we have output
01, O2, 03, 04, 4x4. Okay. And these are
not connected. But these connections are
programmable. So say I4 needs to connect
to 01 and we connect here. Then I3 needs
to connect to 03. We connect here. Then
we connect here. We connect here. Okay.
This is a the circuit.
Then
so this can if you write some gates then
it can actually controlled by some
external right.
So the requirement is that
if O1 O1 can only receive from one side
from one input right then O2 can only
receive from one side then I4 can only
output to one place. So this crossbar
is actually have the very high
performance
that can support auto connection.
Just just give you a comparison for
another alternative design. It's called
bus. What is a bus? Bus is basically one
group of wires that all of them all
input and all output connect to them.
Okay.
So there's an arbiter that select say oh
in this cycle you can send you can
receive. So this one is virtually
connected then this can send and this
can receive. In this way, in in this
way, we can send four unit at in one
cycle and receive four unit at one
cycle. Right? In a bus,
we can send one and receive one
because there's only one group of wires
here.
So in this case, we care about
parallelism. We want all of them to be
able to send data at the same time or
you also need to consider rights. Right
going to go stop, right? So in this way
we have to have a crossbar. However
just consider how large your chip is and
how large this crossbar is. Right? This
is a 100 chip and 100
units and our two caches are here.
You need to connect the whole cache put
the whole chip towards the center.
In this way,
this is a major performance bottleneck
and it will occupy a lot of life sizes.
There's probably very likely that this
part are all just wires connected that
and also you need to consider if you
communicate within a combo unit, you
probably don't need to consider the
latency. But communicate at this level,
you need to consider latency. It's not
one cycle that you can send data from
here to there. Okay? It takes time.
This even the signal propagates a light
at light speed it can be ach
in the center. This is a media media
solve this problem by partitioning L2
caches in two parts B100 GPU. So the
average communication distance is is
shorter but this partition is
responsible for part of the memory. This
partition is responsible for part of
memory. These four group of SMS
communicate with their their own L2
caches. Okay.
But if your data is not there then this
part of L2 cache partition needs to
transfer the data to this part of um L2
partition to access data. that creates
some sort of numa effect or extra
latency but it at least reduces the
complexity of the um the huge crossbar
network. Okay, this was not a problem
when we have like 28 nanometer
technology because we don't have so many
SM or CUS but it becomes really a big
problem when you have 77 nanometer or
even lower even smaller trans
transistors because we had more SM
means more overhead for this
communication then a single crossbar may
not just be able to solve this problem
then they start to have some weird ways
to solve this nontraditional way top
this problem. By the way, this is
probably the largest D size so far,
right?
336.66
mm squared.
Okay, let's quickly go through how cache
works. Then uh let's say
a group of L2 caches.
Then we have a cach line. It's a we mark
it as version one. If C wants to read
the data, we send a read request.
Then it's a cache, right? It's a cashm
because the data is not there. You can
look up it is pack array to display
decide say oh the data is not there.
Then let's send another request to
request from lower level. If L2 is still
miss goes to D. But let's assume it's a
F. Okay. Then we send back this signal
called data ready. The data is there.
Then you can send you the data. Data
ready A. Then the data A is stored in L1
V cache. Okay. And this L1 V cache is
then stored back to data ready. Send
another data ready A signal to the
compute unit. Then the computer unit has
access to this piece of data.
Now at the same time I'm not going to
draw step by step but this process can
happen in another L1 cache.
Okay. Then after this if we want to read
the data read data A again we don't need
to go to L2 cache then we just directly
send data ready A back to compute unit.
We directly have the data that can
reduce the roundtrip time goes to the L2
cache which is which needs to go through
this crowded XAR and reduce latency and
reduce energy consumption.
Okay.
So there's a coherency problem. There's
a minor problem here. Just consider this
carefully. What's the problem?
If L1 V hash writes a
to
the
this first CU writes a to L1 V cache
what happens is in a typical CPU
consideration if this is a TPU CPU cache
what will happen is it will just write
there right locally okay that will make
this part of data st
and we call this 30
because this is the old data. This is
version one. No, sorry. This this is
version two. No, version one. This is
version two.
So what happens here is if we read a
here
now we directly return a data ready a
but it's version one.
Now we are sending style data back to
compute unit.
Right.
Then we call this co coherency error
coherency problem.
So it's not our c the data that in our
caches are not coherent anymore. They
have different versions of this data.
Okay. So for later on for when we talk
about caches we're going to spend at
least one lecture to solve coherency
problem.
But here GPU is take a very special way
to solve this problem. Right? GPU takes
two different method to solve to
mitigate this problem. The first way is
at most mitigation.
If we write a from L1 V cache we don't
only write into this L1 cache. For every
right we just directly write A to L2
cache. And we call this right through
cache. We write through as if the L1 V
is transparent. We write through and
write directly to write to L2 cache.
Okay. Then L2 cache has the updated
version B v2.
Then what's the problem is at this
moment if C2
wants to access A, it's still the still
data still a problem, right?
So can you guess how GPU solve this
problem?
Okay, I tell you GPU has a h of solving
problem say this supporting this feature
is hard then I just simply refuse to
support this feature. you just don't
write this type of code. I do not
support this type of code. Programmers,
it's your responsibility to prevent this
from happening. Okay. CPU work in a way
say no matter what code you write, I
will fulfill your requirement. Okay. GPU
works in a way that
just listen to me. Only write this type
of code. Don't try to write something
weird. Okay? So, it limits the program
model in a GPU program. You should never
write from one thread and read from
another thread. Okay, remember at the
early time we say thread from different
blocks can never communicate with each
other.
If they communicate, they may have this
problem,
right? So two different block they
should on different if right within one
block no problem. They can still access
this piece of data. There's no coherency
issue, right? If nar from two different
blocks and one block right and another
block wants to read data okay good luck
then you can get old data or new data
then
just I can guarantee you can get some
data but I'm not sure which data it is
right so if you really want to say I
want to get a new data what you do stop
the kernel launch another one then the
GPU will launch L1 cache back to L2 two.
So L1 beta will this one disappear this
already disappear but it's a right do
right the block doesn't really need any
right they simply mark all of them to be
empty to be invalid to say don't use
this don't use so it's a super quick
thing then if you start another kernel
always load from L2 again then you
guarantee get the most updated version
so quick way to say this is L1 cache
simply do not uh GPU simply do not
support thread to thread communication
from different blocks and one reason is
what we said in the thread dispatching
process. Blocks are dispatching to
different cus and cus may not hold all
the blocks at one time. So we have to
wait for one group of block to retire
and another group to come see. So they
cannot execute it at the same time.
That's why they cannot communicate.
Another reason is the memory model does
not support that they get the most
upto-date data.
Okay, that's the last thread we have and
we have 20 minutes time that I want to
show you something.
I hope this works.
So, uh what I'm showing you here,
I drag this
top.
Uh, no. I have to
minimize this one.
Can I stop presentation on this side?
Okay, that works.
Okay,
I don't know what
Okay, so we created this visualization
to you know one of the most important
work during my PhD is create a GPU
simulator. So the GPU simulator will
simply do something that
mimic the behavior of a real GPU and
recreate the behavior of every cycle
cycle by cycle and try to
our eventual goal is to predict if we
execute a program on a hardware that
doesn't exist. Then we slightly tweak
the hardware. Then we say we we estimate
the performance of that program on the
virtual on a non-existing GPU. Okay.
Then we also have a visualization tool.
So visualization tool collects data
collect traces from um GPU from the GPU
simulator. After GPU the GPU simulator
while it runs it dumps data into a
trace. Then this is the visualization.
So I can show you this vis how this
visualization works and for the next
assignment I know even the first
assignment I'm still owing you that
assignment have it I just do not have
time to put it on GitHub
but next for the next assignment I need
you to work on this visualization tool
on your own to understand how it works
then I can go through with you together
and I want you to schedule a onehour
meeting with Enzo to talk about like how
you feel about using the Dyson bot tool
which is a agent then see if it can help
you understand more other than what I
taught in class okay I hope that this
tool can actually help you a lot um in
this process
okay so what's here what's here you see
is a group of unit right you can see the
driver the command processor and so on
Right. Then let's look at let's search
for something like L1.
V.
Let's let's do L2 C. It's probably
easier.
Yeah. L2. Yeah, L2 cache, right? You can
see there are different caches, right?
There are uh 16 caches in my
configuration.
There are 16 caches. Then what's their
load? What about their load? And we have
two different metrics to show here. This
one is incoming request rate. One is
average request latency. Then there
there are different things that I can
show you these things. So from here we
can see there are peaks right there are
p of request rate and are these pigs
aligned? The quick answer is they're not
exactly aligned, right? They have
different times. So I don't know why
exactly we have this piece but
definitely they just come at this moment
at for different cache units right so
just a burst of requests arriving at
this particular at each cache and they
arrive at a different time and we can
also see what's the average request the
latency is that changing and the quick
answer is it's not changing right so
sometimes we can see at the beginning
it's very high at the end it's very low
that means
the c the cache heat rate is getting
higher at because the every request
latency is getting lower.
So there are multiple metrics. Now
another metrics that you can see from
here is buffer pressure. The buffer
pressure means how many requests are
waiting there in the buffer of on the
top buffer of this unit. That means how
many requests needs to be processed by
this component. So a full buffer like if
a buffer is always full that means this
unit is not fast enough always a queue
waiting there.
empty buffer is this unit probably too
it's not busy enough not sending enough
request you see the secondary yaxis we
have blue lines right so what's the
number of elements in here it's always
one right but it can go up to 2.5 so it
only at this peak there are more units
in the buffer but for most of time is
one then is it a high number or low
number actually don't know so but at
least it looks like there's something
there. Okay. So then we can zoom in. So
if I'm using my mouse to scroll, we can
zoom in.
Let's zoom in a little bit. In this
moment, I just I'm curious about what's
exactly is happening. You can see this
is sampling process. Now, as you can see
here from a very brief view, from very
zoomed out view, we see it always one.
But if we zoom in now, we can see the
buffer level. It's a blue line, right?
It's pretty much all zero for most of
the time,
right? It's pretty much zero for almost
all the time. That means at this
granularity at the microcond
granularity,
they're not they're not busy at all in
this particular example.
Okay?
Because the buffer pressure is very is
low. And we can also check the
uh average request latency. Let's see.
So they're are pretty much the same
level. So that means very likely they're
all catch misses. Okay. If you want to
know what exactly is happening at this
time, you can click on the on the name
of a unit. Then go let's go to a
detailed view. Okay.
This is a component view. and it shows
everything that happens in this
particular cache. Okay, if you hover on
this one, you see these are read
requests and a request out that is a
read request. Okay,
uh we can zoom in and see what's going
on here.
So it's it's basically this cache it's I
I cannot say it's idle but it's
processing
a lot of data in burst right this is
something that we can see that each bar
each bar each bar is a task is a
transaction arriving at this comp at
this component
and um
if on this we can see it's 117 ncond
So rather than starting from here, I
want to show you from the beginning. So
let's go through the GPU architecture
again and try to understand what's going
on. So this is a
uh
matrix multiplication
by 256 multiply by 256. Okay. XYZ are
all like or K and M are all physics
running on R9 GPU
then
area means the simulation was not even
running trace was not collected so this
is the whole task you look at simulation
simulation that's the root task okay
that's a root task now let's see what
are the driver command it's memory copy
and memory copy so I think It's because
there's not long enough. So this is a
memory copy device to host copying data
back to the CPU and these are memory
copy from the host to the device.
Okay, then let's look at so if we want
to drill down see what's exactly is
happening we can click on this one and
it goes back to here. So on top we can
see this is a current task, parent task
and subtask. So what's this one? This is
a launch kernel command. We launch the
one kernel
then.
So for every request if we send out
something from one part to another part
we have this send out and request out
and request in. So you can see this
request out is from is where
undefined. Sorry about that. I don't
know why it's undefined. It's probably
driver.
I guess there's something something
wrong here.
Uh this should be the driver and this
should be the command processor. Okay.
Something wrong with the legend part.
This is the command processor. Okay. So
it's sending out from the CPU driver
side to the command processor. The
command processor is processing this
one. Now I can drill down. Uh
okay.
Uh okay. Here where is still. So, but at
least you can see if we So, here is the
GPU one command processor. The current
task always have the same location.
The current task always have the same
location as the component below. So, if
we are on that, you can see these two
bars are actually the same task but just
showing twice in the hierarchical view
or the component view. Component view,
we try to show all the components here.
You can see here to to run this kernel
to run this kernel we need to run so
many blocks right those are all the
blocks within this kernel
let's just click a random block then a
block remember this is from uh command
processor
the dispatcher dispatcher is the AC then
it go down to the compute unit okay this
is the compute unit what's happening in
this compute on it.
What's this? This is a map work group
request or this is a work group in MD
terminology is a block. So this is a
work group, right?
Then here within this block there's only
one wavefront. It's a hierarchy.
Let's click on this wave front.
So very likely there's only wave one
wave front executing in this uh in this
computer unit and you can see to run
this wave front we need to run so many
subtasks there
and let's see what's the task fetch
fetch are instruction fetches like what
time is fetches it fetch is definitely
in places right you can say is placed
very clearly there.
What are branches? Branches are executed
not very often. Local data share also
executed not very scalar instructions
almost at the same location. And you can
see the very interesting thing.
Why they take longer time is because
their scaler load and their cash they
have cash misses code misses because at
the beginning their cache is empty
special here are most likely weight
count okay the weight count may only
doing just simply doing synchronization
there so they're not doing actually real
work and if you consider special and v
Those long time ex long executing
the non-executing blocks are vector
memory instructions because there are
memory instructions they take longer
time and you can also see there are
definitely some parallel parallelism
there. We try to execute four memory
instructions and get a result then we do
the calculation right this type of
pattern that we can see here.
Okay. So we can zoom in. Let's just zoom
into one group. Now we can definitely
see there are some patterns. We can zoom
in some one groups. Then we can see
these things clear.
Okay. What are VUS? VUS are there. So
very likely we're loading something on
it.
with
this
like
this light color memory access that
means the alou can overlap with the
memory access even within one word
okay then let's focus on one
vector memory instruction
In this memory interaction,
it has two subtasks here. Okay, that
means it can coales down to two cache
lines.
I just don't know what's the rest.
That's something that we don't record in
the in the trace. So, this is my memory
access. How long it takes?
800 nano second. Remember R9 nano runs
with one GHz. So one nanocond is one
cycle. So this takes 800 nano 800
cycles. That's
long time but not terribly long time.
Right? Then you can also see the whole
CU is also executing a few memory read
requests at this moment.
So the Yaxis here doesn't really matter.
They just try they try to flow up but
but we also want to avoid overlapping.
So the y-axis doesn't matter. It just
say there are different task executing
at the same time.
Now keep going down. See here where
where we arrive we arrived at the RO
buffer. Reorder buffer. We don't have
that thing in our slides but this is a
reorder buffer. Just guarantee the
return in order. Remember when I talk
about ISA AMD return requires the
instruction to be reordered. This is
reorder buffer. We can zoom in and try
to see what's happening in this row
order buffer based execution right that
we can keep straight down. Also we
didn't talk about um address translator.
Okay here's the interesting thing. So
there's a virtual address to physical
address translation. We'll talk about
that later. But if you h the data here,
you can see address translation actually
takes much longer than data read at at
least at this moment. Right? So
people will consider address translation
is an overhead
because loading data is something we
have to do. Translating the translating
address is to fulfill some secondary.
So we would definitely give us a
suggestion that we need to improve the
address translation
uh
performance and we can keep drilling
down. Let's go here. Let's just focus on
this
memory read request.
Now in this case the L1 L1 cache is now
very busy.
Okay,
keep building down
L. This is L1 cache. Now we go to L2
cache. Finally, we arrived the L L2
cache.
Okay, then let's zoom in. This is an
interesting part. There's some weird
thing.
First thing is this group of four
transactions
only one has a inside green card. So
what is green? Green card is request out
as M L2. If it's a cache miss, we need
to send a request to the DM to get the
data, right? So that's why it's
hierarchical, right? To fulfill this
request, we need to do that request. We
need to do the inside task to the
hierarchy from outside to inside. To
fulfill this one, we have to do the
inside one. There's a light blue one
inside. But this three has no nothing
inside, right?
I know the reason. I know the reason.
The reason is this is another sort of
coaling in L2 cache. That means this
four request is actually accessing the
same cach line. So if this one is access
is requesting from the main memory, we
don't really need to send the other
three requests to the main memory. We
just wait for this one to return.
Okay, but since we haven't touched this
part in our lecture, you may not know
this difference.
Later on definitely when we talk about
cache we'll talk about this this
technique but here this is what we can
see so
can see although there are many many
requests in the auto cache the the
actual transaction going to the dun are
not very high they just the whole GPU is
accessing small range of data at this
moment
really this is not a very big matrix so
that's why we see um the L2 caches are
not very busy Then we can we're not
lucky so we didn't select that one but
we can see this one. This is uh this one
that goes to the DM right this are a DM
and can we can zoom out then we can get
how busy this DM is and the quick answer
is not busy at all.
So this is what we can see from this
with this visualization tool. Then um
definitely that gives you I hope that
gives you a quick review of these four
lectures that what we can see from this
visualization to get you a hand down
hand experience just seeing those tasks
one by one and so what things can
overlap what things cannot overlap
um
so I'm going to give you this assignment
to
schedule one time slot just one hour is
good enough with to talk about the scene
We're trying to develop this cyb tool.
So it's a turn to that can help you
explain that say you can add something
like why it takes so long before this um
this request to start why they are so
sparse why it's not uh
why they're so sparse why there are this
region right so you can try to interact
with it and see the screenshot um of
this web page so I can probably try to
help you is definitely some limitation.
So, uh we'll send out emails for
details.
>> Um
this the you mean the visualization tool
or including the ar simulator?
Okay. So for simulator I started first
line of code in December 2016 or early
2017. Now our paper paper first paper
submission was in 2019.
Then it was failed. Then we submitted in
2019 by the end of the year. Then 2020
we get a paper the simulator paper
published. Then 2022
guess it's 2022 we get this paper
published. But it's also a few re
cycles.
Um so if you say say at this time until
this time then it's probably five years.
Um
we're still working on this tool so it
keeps improving. Okay. Then you can try
and then if you collect a trace that is
10 GB size then your browser will will
frozen will be frozen. So there are
still problems performance issues with
this within to but for a smaller scale
you can see things pretty